Here are the Kalman filter equations that you've seen thus far.
We'll be using them to take a look at the two extreme cases for our Kalman filter.
The case where the sensors measurements are perfect,
and the case where the sensor produces completely uncertain data.
Let's start with a perfect sensor.
If the sensor that you're measuring with is perfectly accurate,
then the measurement noise R would be a matrix of zeros.
I will represent it as so.
In such a case,
the equation for S would be simplified to the following.
When you plug the equation for S into the formula for the Kalman gain,
you have the following equation.
We can rewrite this equation.
There's a helpful matrix property that allows us to
apply the inverse not to the product of the matrices,
but to the individual matrices.
However, in the process,
the order of the matrices and the product reverses.
The result is the following equation.
Then we can use another handy matrix property to simplify even further.
The H transpose and the inverse of
the H transpose are simplified to be the identity function,
as R P prime and the inverse of P prime.
The result is that the Kalman gain is equal to the inverse of
the measurement function H. This is important,
so let's keep this in mind as we continue.
The next equation in the Kalman filter has us updating the mean using the Kalman gain.
We haven't yet calculated the measurement residual Y,
so let's plug in the equation for it.
Now, we can replace K with what we calculated it to be earlier.
From here, it's as easy as multiplying out the inverse of H
to every term inside of the brackets and simplifying the result.
Once again, we can substitute the inverse of H multiplied by H with the identity matrix.
Then, you'll notice that we have X prime and negative X prime in the same equation,
these sum to zero.
And the entire equation simplifies to X is equal to the inverse of H
multiplied by Z. H is the function that maps from the state to the measurement,
so its inverse would map from the measurement to the state.
The new mean is entirely made up from the measurement.
We've thrown out any information that
the state prediction provided because it's not needed,
the measurement is perfect.
The same can be shown for an utterly imperfect measurement,
one that you know you cannot rely on at all.
In such a case,
R would be a matrix of infinities.
The uncertainty is as high as it can be.
I'll represent it as so again.
Now, the equation for S contains the product of some matrices plus infinity.
In such a case, S would equal infinity.
Once again, we move on to the Kalman gain equation.
Here we can substitute S for infinity.
And now we have the product of some matrices including one that is
the inverse of infinity as an infinity to the power of negative one.
Well, that's zero.
And anything multiplied by zero is zero itself.
With a negligible sensor,
the Kalman gain is zero.
The equation for the new mean would only have one term left,
and so X is equal to X prime.
In such a case,
the new mean is equal to the state prediction and
the measurement update is not included at all as it is unreliable.
As you saw here,
the two extremes for the Kalman filter are a perfect sensor and a negligible sensor.
And these two cases,
the new state is either exclusively dependent on
the measurement or exclusively reliant on the state prediction.
In reality, you will more often find that the Kalman gain is somewhere between the two.
It is an averaging factor evaluating which of the measurement update or
state prediction should be trusted more
based on the measurement noise and the process noise.
I hope that working through these two examples has
demystified the Kalman filter equations just a bit.
Once again, you need not remember these equations,
they can be referenced from the lesson or textbook as needed.